Task 1: What is Spring Data JPA?

Spring Data JPA is a part of the Spring ecosystem that makes it easier to work with databases using JPA (Java Persistence API).

It reduces the amount of database-related code we need to write. We can create repository interfaces and Spring Data JPA provides common database operations automatically.

Example:

public interface EmployeeRepository 
        extends JpaRepository<Employee, Long> {
}

Now we can perform operations like:

Save Employee
Find Employee
Update Employee
Delete Employee

without writing SQL for every basic operation.

Task 2: What are the key features of Spring Data JPA?
Repository Support – Provides ready-made repository interfaces like JpaRepository.
CRUD Operations – Provides methods for Create, Read, Update, and Delete operations.
Query Methods – Can create database queries using method names.
Custom Queries – Allows writing custom queries using @Query.
Pagination and Sorting – Supports retrieving data in pages and sorting results.
Transaction Support – Helps manage database transactions.
JPA Integration – Works with JPA and ORM frameworks like Hibernate.
Less Boilerplate Code – Reduces the amount of database code we need to write.
Task 3: What are the core components of Spring Data JPA?

The main components are:

Entity – A Java class that represents a table in the database. Usually marked with @Entity.
Repository – Interface used to communicate with the database. For example, JpaRepository.
EntityManager – Manages entities and their interaction with the database.
JPA Provider – The implementation that performs the actual ORM work. Hibernate is commonly used as the JPA provider.
Query Methods – Methods that allow us to retrieve data using method names, such as findByName().
Transaction Management – Manages database operations as transactions.

Simple flow:
Java Entity
     ↓
Repository
     ↓
Spring Data JPA
     ↓
JPA / Hibernate
     ↓
Database


Task 6: What is application.properties file?

application.properties is a configuration file used in Spring Boot applications. It is usually located inside:

src/main/resources/application.properties

We use it to store application settings like:

Server port
Database connection
Username and password
Logging settings
Spring configuration

Example:

server.port=8081
spring.application.name=BankingApplication


Task 7: Why use application.properties? Uses?

We use application.properties to keep configuration settings outside the Java code.

Main uses:

Change server port.
Configure database connection.
Set application name.
Configure logging.
Configure Spring Boot settings.
Store environment-specific configuration.

Example:

server.port=8081
spring.datasource.url=jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/bank
spring.datasource.username=root
spring.datasource.password=password

This makes it easier to change configuration without modifying the Java code.

Task 8: What is application.yml?

application.yml is another configuration file used in Spring Boot applications.

It serves the same basic purpose as application.properties, but it uses YAML format and represents configuration in a hierarchical structure.

Example:

server:
  port: 8081

spring:
  application:
    name: BankingApplication

The same configuration in application.properties would be:

server.port=8081
spring.application.name=BankingApplication


Task 9: Why use/prefer application.yml instead of application.properties?

application.yml is often preferred when the application has many nested or hierarchical configurations.

Advantages:

Easier to read for complex configurations.
Uses indentation to show relationships.
Avoids repeating long property prefixes.
Better for large configuration files.
Supports lists and nested structures in a cleaner way.

Example:

spring:
  datasource:
    url: jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/bank
    username: root
    password: password

The same configuration in properties format:

spring.datasource.url=jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/bank
spring.datasource.username=root
spring.datasource.password=password

In short:

application.properties → Simple key-value format

application.yml        → Hierarchical and structured format

Both are valid. The choice is mainly based on readability and personal/team preference.

Task 10: What is Eureka Server?

Eureka Server is a service registry used in microservices applications.

It keeps a list of all running microservices and their locations.

For example:

Eureka Server
     │
     ├── User Service → localhost:8081
     ├── Account Service → localhost:8082
     └── Transaction Service → localhost:8083

Each microservice registers itself with the Eureka Server.

Task 11: Purpose of Eureka Server

The main purpose of Eureka Server is service discovery.

It helps microservices find and communicate with each other without manually storing the IP address and port of every service.

Example:

Account Service
      │
      │ "I need User Service"
      ↓
Eureka Server
      │
      │ "User Service is running at..."
      ↓
User Service

Main uses:
Keeps a registry of available services.
Helps services discover each other.
Reduces hard-coded IP addresses and ports.
Supports dynamic service registration.
Helps with load balancing when multiple instances of a service are running.