ORM Concepts and JPA
Task 1: How does ORM bridge the gap between OOP and relational databases?

ORM (Object-Relational Mapping) connects Java objects with database tables. It allows developers to work with Java objects instead of writing SQL for every operation.

JPA is a Java specification/standard that defines how ORM should work. Hibernate is one of the popular implementations of JPA.

Example:

Java Class → Database Table
   User    →    users
   id      →    id
   name    →    name

ORM = connects objects with tables.
JPA = standard/rules for ORM.
Hibernate = implementation of JPA.

Hibernate Fundamentals
Task 2: Why is Hibernate a powerful JPA implementation?

Hibernate provides the actual functionality required to implement JPA, such as:

Automatically converting Java objects ↔ database records.
Generating SQL queries.
Managing relationships between entities.
Supporting caching.
Managing transactions and database connections.
How does caching improve performance?

Hibernate can keep frequently used data in memory. When the same data is requested again, Hibernate can return it from the cache instead of querying the database again.

Example:

First request → Hibernate → Database → User data
Second request → Hibernate Cache → User data

This reduces database queries and improves performance.

Hibernate = JPA implementation + ORM features + caching + database management.

🔹 Entity Mapping & Relationships
Task 3: How do entity relationships affect database design and query complexity?
One-to-One (1:1): One record relates to one record. Usually simple to design and query.
Example: User → Passport
One-to-Many (1:N): One record relates to many records. Requires foreign keys and can produce more complex queries.
Example: Author → Books
Many-to-Many (N:M): Many records relate to many records. Requires a join table, making queries and management more complex.
Example: Students ↔ Courses

1:1 = simplest, 1:N = moderate, N:M = most complex.


JPQL: Works with Java entities, not directly with tables.

Criteria API: Useful when queries need to be built dynamically.

Native SQL: Gives complete control over database-specific SQL.

JPQL → simple/common queries
Criteria → dynamic queries
Native SQL → complex or database-specific queries

🔹 Spring Data JPA
Task 5: How does Spring Data JPA simplify repositories?

Spring Data JPA automatically provides common database operations, so we don't have to write the implementation ourselves.

public interface UserRepository
        extends JpaRepository<User, Long> {
}

Methods like save(), findById(), findAll(), and delete() are already available.

We can also create derived queries:

findByName(String name)
Risk of too many derived queries

Very long derived method names can become hard to read and maintain.

findByNameAndAgeAndCityAndStatusAndDepartment(...)

Spring Data JPA = less boilerplate, but too many complex derived queries can make code confusing.

🔹 Task 6: When does LazyInitializationException occur?

LazyInitializationException occurs with LAZY loading, not because of EAGER loading.

It happens when you try to access a lazy-loaded relationship after the Hibernate session/transaction is closed.

Example:
Author author = authorRepository.findById(1L).get();


// Transaction/session is now closed


author.getBooks().size();  // ❌ LazyInitializationException

Why?

LAZY:
Author loaded
    ↓
Books NOT loaded
    ↓
Transaction closes
    ↓
getBooks() called
    ↓
Hibernate cannot access DB
    ↓
❌ LazyInitializationException

With EAGER, the related data is loaded earlier, so this particular lazy-initialization problem normally does not occur.

Remember:
LAZY + access after session closes = LazyInitializationException

Task 02: Distributed Caching

Q: How does replication lag affect consistency, and how can it be mitigated?

Replication lag means a Redis replica may not have the latest data from the primary yet. Therefore, a read from the replica can return old/stale data.

Example:
Primary Redis has balance = ₹10,000, but the replica still has ₹9,000. A user reading from the replica may see ₹9,000.

Ways to reduce the problem:

Read critical data from the primary.
Use replicas mainly for less-critical read operations.
Monitor replication lag.
Use appropriate consistency settings when necessary.

Replication lag = faster/scalable reads but possible stale data.

Task 03: Redis for Session Management

Redis is preferred for sessions because it is very fast, supports high request volumes, and provides centralized session storage that can be shared by multiple application servers.

Example:

User → Server 1 ─┐
                 ├→ Redis → Session
User → Server 2 ─┘

Both servers can access the same user's session.

Risk if persistence is not configured

Redis primarily stores data in memory. If Redis crashes or restarts without persistence, session data may be lost, causing users to be logged out.

Redis sessions = fast + shared across servers, but persistence is important if losing sessions is unacceptable.

Task 04: Cache Stampede

A cache stampede happens when a popular cache entry expires and many requests simultaneously try to get the same data from the database.

Example:

Cache expires
     ↓
1,000 users request same product
     ↓
1,000 requests → Database
     ↓
Database overloaded
How to prevent it?

1. Request Coalescing:
Allow only one request to fetch the missing data from the database. Other requests wait for that result.

2. Probabilistic Early Expiration:
Some requests refresh the cache slightly before it expires, reducing the chance that many requests hit the database at exactly the same time.

Cache stampede = many requests hit the database at once after cache expiration.
Request coalescing + early refresh = fewer database spikes.

Task 05: Managing Migrations Across Environments
Q1: Why should migration scripts be applied sequentially across Dev, Test, Staging, and Production?

Using the same migration scripts in the same order keeps all environments consistent.

Example: If Dev has migration V1 → V2 → V3, Production should also follow V1 → V2 → V3.

If environments drift, an application may work in Dev but fail in Production because the database structures are different.

Same scripts + same order = consistent environments and fewer surprises.

Q2: When is rollback preferable to fix-forward? How do Liquibase and Flyway differ?

Rollback is preferable when a migration causes a serious problem and restoring the previous database state is safer and faster.

Fix-forward means fixing the problem by creating a new migration instead of undoing the old one.

Example: A migration accidentally removes important data → rollback may be safer.

Liquibase: Provides explicit rollback support where rollback changes can be defined for migrations.
Flyway: Primarily follows forward-only migrations; rollback is generally handled through new corrective migrations or other recovery strategies.

Rollback = go back. Fix-forward = create a new fix.

Q3: How does Expand/Contract support zero-downtime migrations?

The Expand/Contract pattern changes the database in stages so old and new application versions can work together.

Expand:
Add the new column/table without removing the old one.

Migrate:
Update the application and gradually move data to the new structure.

Contract:
Remove the old column/table after the application no longer needs it.

Example:

Old: name


Expand → name + full_name
         ↓
Migrate → application uses full_name
         ↓
Contract → remove name

Trade-off: The old database structure must be maintained for some time, increasing storage, code complexity, and maintenance.

Expand → Migrate → Contract = safer schema changes without downtime.

Q4: Role of data validation in ETL migrations

Data validation checks whether the migrated data is complete, correct, and consistent.

Common checks:

Row counts: Same number of records.
Checksums/hashes: Detect changed data.
Referential integrity: Foreign-key relationships remain valid.
Data type/range checks: Values remain valid.

Automation can run these checks automatically after migration, reducing manual mistakes and missed errors.

Example: If the source has 1,000,000 customers but the target has 999,500, validation immediately identifies a problem.

Validation ensures migrated data is trustworthy.

Q5: Why is datatype mapping difficult between different databases?

Different database engines may represent the same type of data differently.

Example:

MySQL      → PostgreSQL
TINYINT    → SMALLINT/BOOLEAN
DATETIME   → TIMESTAMP

Incorrect mapping can cause data loss, conversion errors, slower queries, or increased storage usage.

Example: Choosing an unnecessarily large datatype for millions of records can increase storage and potentially affect performance.

Correct datatype mapping = data correctness + better performance.

Q6: How can we validate data integrity after migration?

Row counts alone are not enough. We can also use:

Checksums/hashes to compare data.
Primary-key and foreign-key validation.
Duplicate detection.
NULL and constraint checks.
Aggregate comparisons such as totals and averages.
Application-level tests to verify that the application behaves correctly with the migrated data.

Example: A banking database may have the same number of accounts after migration, but we should also verify that account balances, transactions, and account-to-transaction relationships are correct.

Database checks verify the data; application tests verify that the migrated data actually works correctly in the real application.