Task 1: What do you understand about Integration Testing?

Integration Testing is testing two or more modules together to check whether they work and communicate correctly.

Example:
In a banking app, checking whether the Fund Transfer API correctly updates the database.

Task 2: Where do you use it and when?

It is used when different modules or systems interact with each other.

It is usually done after Unit Testing and before System Testing.

Example:
Testing whether Frontend → Backend API → Database works correctly together.

Task 4: What are Test Containers?

Testcontainers is a tool/library that creates temporary containers (usually Docker containers) for testing applications with real dependencies.

Example:
We can start a temporary MySQL container to test our application with a real database.

Task 5: When do we use it and what is the need?

We use Testcontainers during integration testing when our application depends on external services like databases, Kafka, Redis, etc.

Need: It provides a real and isolated environment for testing without installing or manually configuring those services.

Example:
Instead of using our local MySQL database, testing can start a temporary MySQL Docker container, run tests, and remove it after testing.

Task 7: What is Code Coverage?

Code coverage tells us how much of our source code is executed while running tests.

It is usually shown as a percentage.

Example:
If our tests execute 80 out of 100 lines of code, the code coverage is 80%.

Task 8: What’s the need for Code Coverage?

Code coverage helps us find which parts of the code are not being tested.

It helps improve the quality and completeness of testing.

Example:
If an if-else condition is never tested, code coverage can show that the else part is not covered.

Task 10: What is Redux used for?

Redux is a state management library used to store and manage application data in one central place.

Example:
In a banking app, Redux can store the user's balance and transaction data so different components can access it.

Task 11: Why do we need to maintain state throughout the app?

We maintain state so that different components can access and share the same data without passing it through many components.

Example:
If the user's balance is stored in Redux, both the Dashboard and Transaction components can use the same balance.

Task 12: What is useSelector used for?

useSelector is a React-Redux hook used to read/access data from the Redux store.

Example:

const balance = useSelector(state => state.account.balance);

Here, balance gets the user's balance from the Redux store.

Task 14: What is Node.js for?

Node.js is a runtime environment that allows us to run JavaScript outside the browser, mainly for building backend applications and APIs.

Example:
Using Node.js to create a REST API for a banking application.

Task 15: Why use Node.js?

Node.js is used because it is fast, lightweight, scalable, and uses JavaScript for both frontend and backend.

Example:
We can use React for frontend + Node.js for backend using JavaScript/TypeScript.

Task 16: What are Common and Modern Modules in Node.js?

Node.js mainly has two module systems:

CommonJS: Uses require() and module.exports.
ES Modules (Modern): Uses import and export.

Example:

// CommonJS
const fs = require("fs");

// ES Module
import fs from "fs";

In short: CommonJS is the older module system, while ES Modules are the modern JavaScript standard.


Node.js — Home Task Notes
1. Difference between Node.js and Apache/Nginx

Node.js is a JavaScript runtime used to run backend code.
Apache/Nginx are mainly web servers used to serve web pages, files, and handle HTTP requests.

Example: Node.js can run an Express API, while Nginx can serve static files or act as a reverse proxy.

2. Event-driven architecture of Node.js

Node.js works on an event-driven model, where actions happen in response to events.

Example: When a user sends a request, Node.js starts the operation and handles the response when the operation is completed.

3. How does single-threaded Node.js handle concurrency?

Node.js uses a single main thread and an event loop to handle many requests without creating a new thread for each request.

Example: While one request waits for a database response, Node.js can handle another request.

4. Role of V8 engine in Node.js

V8 is Google's JavaScript engine used by Node.js to execute JavaScript code.

Example: V8 converts JavaScript code into machine-level instructions so it can run efficiently.

5. Why is Node.js considered non-blocking?

Node.js is non-blocking because it does not wait for slow operations like file reading or database requests to finish before handling other work.

Example: Node.js can handle another request while waiting for a file to be read.

6. Difference between callbacks, promises, and async/await

All three are ways to handle asynchronous operations.

Callback: Function executed after an operation finishes.
Promise: Represents the future result of an asynchronous operation.
Async/await: Cleaner and easier way to work with promises.

Example: async/await makes asynchronous code look similar to normal synchronous code.

7. How does the Event Loop work and what are its phases?

The Event Loop continuously checks for completed asynchronous operations and executes their callbacks.

Main phases include:

Timers → Pending Callbacks → Poll → Check → Close Callbacks

Example: setTimeout() callbacks are handled in the Timers phase.

8. Difference between process.nextTick() and setImmediate()
process.nextTick() runs before the Event Loop continues to its next phase.
setImmediate() runs during the Check phase of the Event Loop.

Example: process.nextTick() generally executes before setImmediate().

9. How does Node.js handle I/O operations asynchronously?

Node.js sends I/O operations such as file reading, database requests, and network requests to the underlying system/libuv instead of blocking the main thread.

When the operation finishes, its callback or promise is handled by the Event Loop.

10. How does require() work internally?

require() is used in CommonJS to import modules.

Node.js finds the requested module, loads and executes it, caches it, and returns its exported value.

Example:

const fs = require("fs");
11. Purpose of package.json and package-lock.json
package.json: Contains project information, scripts, and required dependencies.
package-lock.json: Records the exact versions of installed packages and their dependencies.

Example: package.json may specify Express, while package-lock.json records the exact Express version installed.

12. Difference between dependencies and devDependencies
dependencies: Packages required when the application runs.
devDependencies: Packages mainly required during development and testing.

Example:

express → dependencies
jest → devDependencies